Build and test standards
==========================

This is the recommended setup to be able to build and test a project using the
ovirt infrastructure.


The automation directory
-----------------------------------

Each project must have in the root directory, a subdirectory names automation,
that must contain any scripts and configuration files described here.

All the scripts will be run from the root directory, using a relative path,
like:

    automation/build-artifacts.sh


No parameters will be passed, and no assumptions on any preexisting environment
variables should be made except for the default minimal ones (USER, PWD, ...).
You should not depend either on any artifacts generated by other scripts (for
example, build-artifacts should not depend on any artifacts generated by
check-merged) as currently they run in parallel if possible and on different
hosts.

Standard CI 'Stages'
---------------------------------------
The standard CI framework supports different 'stages' in a patch lifecycle.
Each stage has its own triggers, builders and other features which will
be described in the 'scripts' section below.

Listed below are the current supported stages:

 * *'build-artifacts'*:

    Trigger: After a commit (patch) is merged.<br>
    Action: build project artifacts and deploy to yum repos.<br>
    Uses the 'build-artifacts.*' files.<br><br>

 * *'build-artifacts-on-demand'*:

    This isn't a real stage, but it has its own trigger and jobs.<br>
    Trigger: comment 'ci please build' is added to a patch.<br>
    Action: build project artifacts on demand from an open patch.<br>
    Uses the 'build-artifacts.*' files.<br><br>

 * *'build-artifacts-manual'*:

    Trigger: Manual run from the Jenkins job.<br>
    Action: Build official RPMs from TARBALL.<br>
    Uses the 'build-artifacts-manual.sh' file.<br><br>

 * *'check-patch'*:

    Trigger: Runs on every new patchset.<br>
    Action: Runs any code written in the check-patch.sh script.<br>
    Uses the 'check-patch.*' files<br><br>

 * *'check-merged'*:

    Trigger: Runs on every new commit merged.<br>
    Action: Runs any code written in the check-merged.sh script.<br>
    Uses the 'check-merged.*' files<br><br>

 * *'poll-upstream-sources'*:

    Trigger: Runs scheduled.<br>
    Action: Runs any code written in the poll-upstream-sources.sh script.<br>
    Uses the 'poll-upstream-sources.*' files<br><br>


Scripts
---------------------------------------

### build-artifacts.sh

To build a project, you have to create a shell script (will be run with bash)
named *build-artifacts* inside the automation directory.

This should generate any artifacts to be archived (isos, rpms, debs, tarballs,
...) and **leave them at exported-artifacts/** directory, at the same level as
the automation directory, in the root. The build system will collect anything
left there.
It must make sure that the exported-artifacts is empty if needed, or created
if non-existing.


### build-artifacts-manual.sh

This script is meant for building artifacts from an existing tarball file,
assuming the file is already found inside the project's top directory. As in
'build-artifacts.sh', this script should also leave the files at the
**exported-artifacts/** directory, under the automation directory, and make
sure it's empty, or created if non-existing before using it.


### check-patch.sh

This script should not run any long-running tests, it should be focused on
giving quick feedback to the developers while developing a patchset.
Usually you would run static code checks and unit tests.


### check-merged.sh

This script is meant to be run as a gate when merging changes to the main
branch, it should run all the tests that you find required for any change to
get merged, that might include all the tests you run for *check-patch.sh*, but
also some functional tests or other tests that require mote time/resources. It
will not be run as often as the *check-patch.sh*


### poll-upstream-sources.sh

This script will run once a day.
It'll basically update the current project and branch with the latest commit
of the corresponding upstream project.
For example, if a project has an upstream project (an upstream
project is a project containing all code/files/etc minus some modifications
in the current project) in github, the poll stage will send a patch with the
latest commit in the corresponding branch of the upstream project.
Commit will be held in a special file named upstream_sources.yaml which will
lay under the automation folder.
upstream_sources.yaml will contain repository url, commit SHA and branch.
It should run whatever a project maintainer thinks needs to be tested before
updating the latest code from the upstream project


### Running parallel tests

In the future we might support having more than one of the above scripts,
possibly in the form:

    check-patch.testN.sh

To allow running them in parallel, for starters we only support a unique
script, if you want or need any parallelized execution you should handle it
yourself for now.



Declaring dependencies
----------------------------------------

#### Packages

To declare package dependencies when building the artifacts, you can create a
plain text file named **build-artifacts.req** or **build-artifacts.packages**
at the same level as the script, *bulid-artifacts.packages* being preferred,
with a newline separated list of packages to install. If the packages are
distribution specific, you must put them on their own requirements file, that
should have the name **build-artifacts.packages.${releasever}** is one of:

    * fc23
    * fc24
    * fc25
    * el6
    * el7

That list will be updated with new values when new versions and distros become
available.
This technique can be applied to any requirements file (req/packages, repos or
mounts)


#### Repositories

You can also specify custom repos to use in the mock chroot, to do so, you can
specify them one per line in a file named **build-artifacts.repos**, with the
format:

    [name,]url

If no name is passed, one will be generated for the repo. Those repos will be
available at any time inside the chroot. If you use the keyword $distro in the
url it will be replaced with the current chroot distro at runtime (el6, el7,
fc21, ...).


#### Mounted dirs

Sometimes you will need some extra directories inside the chroot, to do so you
can specify them in a file named **build-artifacts.mounts**, one per line with
the format:

    src_dir[:dst_dir]

If no dst_dir is specified, the src_dir will be mounted inside the chroot with
the same path it has outside.


Extra note on dependencies
--------------------------

The tests will run on a minimal installation environment, so do not expect
anything to be installed, if you are not sure if your dep is installed, declare
it. Note that the distribution matrix to run the tests on is defined in the
yaml files at the [jenkins repo][jenkins_git_repo].

For example, if your build scripts needs git to get the version string, add it
as a dependency, if it needs autotools, maven, pep8, tox or similar, declare it
too.

To improve the CI system performance the testing environment may be cached.
Therefore, there is no guarantee that the latest versions of the dependency
packages will be installed. To ensure you get the latest packages, you can
install a package manager (e.g. "`yum`" or "`dnf`") and use it from your
scripts.

Testing the scripts locally
----------------------------

To test the scripts locally, you can use the *mock\_runner.sh* script that is
stored in the [jenkis repo][jenkins_git_repo], under mock_config directory.

Take into account that you must have mock installed and your user should be
able to run it, if you don't, check the [mock help page][mock_install_page]

The *mock\_runner.sh* script will use the default mock configs, located at
*/etc/mock* dir on your machine, but we recommend using the same ones that we
use on CI, that are located in the same dir than the script, under
*mock_configs* dir in the [jenkins repo][jenkins_git_repo].

Let's see a full session with *mock_runner.sh*, that will execute the scripts
(check-patch, check-merged and build-artifacts) on each chroot. That will take
some time the first time you run it, as it will generate the chroot base images
for each distro.

    git clone git://gerrit.ovirt.org/jenkins
    cd myporject
    ls automation
    ...
    shows the check-patch.sh, check-merged.sh and build-artifacts.sh
    scripts and .repo, .packages and .mounts files if any
    ...
    ../jenkins/mock_configs/mock_runner.sh \
        --mock-confs-dir ../jenkins/mock_configs

If you only wanted to run one of the scripts, say the check-patch, you can pass
the *--patch-only* option.

To debug a run, you can start a shell right where it would run the script, to
do so you have to run it like this:

    ../jenkins/mock_configs/mock_runner.sh \
        --mock-confs-dir ../jenkins/mock_configs \
        --patch-only \
        --shell el6

Note that you have to specify a chroot to the *--shell* option, or it will not
know which one to start the shell on. Then you can explore the contents of the
chroot. **Remember that the project dir is mounted on */tmp/run* directory**


### Specifying which chroots to run on

The complete specification of the chroot is in the form:

    req_file_suffix:mock_root_name

For example:

    mock_runner.sh \
        --mock-confs-dir ../jenkins/mock_configs \
        --build-only \
        el7:epel-7-x86_64

This will run the *build-artifacts.sh* script inside the epel-7-x86_64 mock
chroot and will use any *build-artifacts.\*.el7* files to customize it.

But a nice feature that *mock_runner.sh* has is that it will match the name
passed with the default specs. With that feature the above command can be
simplified as:

    mock_runner.sh \
        --mock-confs-dir ../jenkins/mock_configs \
        --build-only \
        el7

A lot simpler!

Adding a project to standard-ci in Jenkins
------------------------------------------
A project can be configured to run standard tests in [jenkins][oVirt_Jenkins].
The configurations are done by creating two files in the
[jenkins repo][jenkins_git_repo]:
1.  A project yaml file, named '{project name}_standard.yaml'
2.  An scm yaml file for the project git repo, named {project}.yaml.

The yaml files will be read by jenkins-job-builder and the configurations will
be deployed to jenkins once the patch is merged.
[Here][Adding a yamlized jobs to Jenkins with JJB] you can find more info
about testing/updating yaml configurations before the patch is merged.

### Creating a project yaml file:
First, a project directory should be created in [jenkins repo][jenkins_git_repo]
under jobs/confs/projects. Within this directory, a project yaml file named
'{project name}_standard.yaml' should be created and the following needs to be
specified:

* **project** - the name of the project(s) to create the jobs for
* **version and branch name** - the project version(s) and the name of the git
branch for the specified version
* **stage** - the standard stage(s) to create the jobs for. Can be either:
  * *check-patch*
  * *check-merged*
  * *build-artifacts* - see below an important note for this stage
  * *build-artifacts-manual* - see below an important note for this stage
* **distro** - the distribution that should be tested (e.g. el7, fc24)
* **trigger** - how should the jobs be triggered. Can be either:
  * *timed* - in this case, 'trigger-times' key should also be specified, with
    the schedule value
  * *on-change* - in this case the appropriate '{stage}_trigger_on-change'
    trigger will be used. These triggers are already configured in
    [jenkins repo][jenkins_git_repo],
    under jobs/confs/yaml/triggers/standard.yaml
  * *manual* - for build-artifacts-manual stage, the trigger should be set to
    manual
* **arch** - the architecture that should be tested

The jobs that will be created will be given a name in the form of: <br>
'{project}\_{version}\_{stage}-{distro}-{arch}'. <br>The specific jobs names that
will be created is a cartesian product of the different values of the above
confs. Specific combinations can be excluded by specifing them in yaml.

An example for a project yaml file:

    - project: &base-params  # this syntax is used for inheritance
        name: ovirt-dwh_standard
        project:
          - ovirt-dwh
        version:
          - master:
              branch: master
          - 4.1:
              branch: ovirt-engine-dwh-4.1
          - 4.0:
              branch: ovirt-engine-dwh-4.0
        stage:
          - check-patch
          - check-merged
        distro:
          - el7
          - fc24
          - fc25
        exclude:
          - version: master
            distro: fc24
          - version: 4.0
            distro: fc25
          - version: 4.1
            distro: fc25
        trigger: 'on-change'
        arch: x86_64
        jobs:
          - '{project}_{version}_{stage}-{distro}-{arch}'

    - project:
        <<: *base-params  # this syntax indicates inheritance
        name: ovirt-dwh_build-artifacts
        stage: build-artifacts  # the stage parameter is overwritten
        jobs:
          - '{project}_{version}_build-artifacts-{distro}-{arch}'
          - '{project}_{version}_{stage}-on-demand-{distro}-{arch}'


#### A note for adding build-artifacts jobs:
When creating build-artifacts jobs, the 'jobs' parameter value under the
project's definition should be in the form of: <br>
'{project}_{version}_build-artifacts-{distro}-{arch}' <br>
This is because the way that the yaml template of the build-artifacts jobs is
configured. As a result, there should be a separate project definition block
for the check-patch/check-merged and the build-artifacts jobs.
See example above.

#### A note for adding build-artifacts-manual jobs:
When creating build-artifacts-manual jobs, the 'trigger' parameter should be
set to 'manual', and the 'jobs' parameter value should be in the form of: <br>
'{project}_{version}_build-artifacts-manual-{distro}-{arch}' <br>
As a result there should be a separate project definition for the
build-artifacts-manual jobs. See example below:

    # Only needed to allow building from TARBALLs
    - project:
        <<: *base-params  # this syntax indicates inheritance
        name: ovirt-dwh_build-artifacts-manual
        stage: build-artifacts-manual  # the stage parameter is overwritten
        trigger: manual  # the trigger parameter is overwritten
        jobs:
          - '{project}_{version}_build-artifacts-manual-{distro}-{arch}'

Additionally, for build-artifacts-manual, another job should be
created, named '{project}_any_build-artifacts-manual'. In this job the user
will upload a local tarball, and select the version of the product from a
drop-down menu. The job will then call the relevant distro-specific
build-artifacts-manual jobs for the specified version, and pass the tarball to
them. The triggered jobs will then run the build-artifacts-manual.sh script
inside a mock environment.

In order to create this job, another project configuration should be added to
the project yaml file, specifying the project name and the list of supported
versions (this list will be shown to the user as a drop down menu).

An example for adding the '{project}_any_build-artifacts-manual' to yaml:

    - project:
        project: ovirt-dwh  # you may also use inheritance for the project name
        name: ovirt-dwh_build-artifacts-manual-any
        version:
          - '3.6'
          - '4.0'
          - 'master'
        jobs:
          - '{project}_any_build-artifacts-manual'

#### A note for adding poll-upstream-sources jobs:
When creating poll-upstream-sources jobs, the 'trigger' parameter should be
set to 'timed'.
A poll-upstream-sources project should look like this:
- project:
    name: ds-vdsm_poll
    node-filter: worker && kvm
    project: vdsm
    stage: poll-upstream-sources
    trigger: 'timed'
    git-server: gerrit.ovirt.org
    version:
      - master:
          branch: master
    distro: el7
    arch: x86_64
    jobs:
        - '{project}_{version}_{stage}-{distro}-{arch}'

### Creating an scm file for the project:
A {project}.yaml file should be added under the jobs/confs/yaml/scms directory.
The scm name should be in the format of {project}-gerrit.

An example for a project yaml file:

    - scm:
        name: ovirt-dwh-gerrit
        scm:
          - gerrit:
              project: ovirt-dwh
              git-server: '{git-server}'

More examples can be found in the [jenkins repo][jenkins_git_repo] under
the jobs/confs directory.


[jenkins_git_repo]: https://gerrit.ovirt.org/#/admin/projects/jenkins
[mock_install_page]: https://fedoraproject.org/wiki/Projects/Mock
[oVirt_Jenkins]: http://jenkins.ovirt.org
